README.md, before:

# Orchestra 🎼

> Orchestrate your Claude Code workflow with focused extensions

## Quick Start

```bash
# Clone and install Orchestra system-wide
git clone git@github.com:coopermaruyama/orchestra.git
cd orchestra
pip install --user .

# Install task-monitor extension (local to current project)
orchestra install task-monitor

# Or install globally for all projects
orchestra install task-monitor --global

# Use it in Claude Code
/task start
```

> Note: Extensions include a bootstrap script that allows team members to use commands even without Orchestra installed. They'll get friendly installation instructions on first use.


## What is Orchestra?

Orchestra is a lightweight extension manager for Claude Code that helps you stay focused and productive. Extensions are installed to `.claude/commands/` (local) or `~/.claude/commands/` (global).

## Available Extensions

### task-monitor
Keep Claude focused on your task requirements. No scope creep, no over-engineering.

**Commands:**
- `/task start` - Interactive task setup with intelligent questions
- `/task status` - Check your progress
- `/task next` - See what to work on next
- `/task complete` - Mark current item done
- `/focus` - Quick focus reminder

**Features:**
- Blocks off-topic commands
- Warns about scope creep
- Tracks progress automatically
- Guides you through requirements

## Installation

### Prerequisites
- Python 3.8+
- pip (for `--user` install) or pipx (recommended for isolated install)

### Install Orchestra

**Option 1: System-wide installation (Recommended for CLI usage)**

```bash
# Clone the repository
git clone https://github.com/your-org/orchestra.git
cd orchestra

# Install system-wide (makes 'orchestra' available in PATH)
pip install --user .

# Or install with pipx (manages virtual environment automatically)
pipx install .
```

**Option 2: Development installation**

```bash
# Clone the repository
git clone https://github.com/your-org/orchestra.git
cd orchestra

# Create virtual environment
python3 -m venv venv
source venv/bin/activate  # On Windows: venv\Scripts\activate

# Install in development mode
pip install -e .
```

**Verify Installation**

```bash
# Check that orchestra is available in PATH
which orchestra
orchestra --help
```

### Install Extensions

```bash
# Local install (current project only)
orchestra install task-monitor

# Global install (all projects)
orchestra install task-monitor --global

# List installed extensions
orchestra list

# Uninstall
orchestra uninstall task-monitor
```

## Direct Command Usage

You can run task commands directly from the command line without entering Claude Code:

```bash
# Start a new task interactively
./orchestra.py task start

# Check task status
./orchestra.py task status

# See what to work on next
./orchestra.py task next

# Mark current requirement as complete
./orchestra.py task complete

# Get a quick focus reminder
./orchestra.py task focus
```

## Team Collaboration

When you install Orchestra extensions in a project, team members can use the commands immediately:

1. **With Orchestra installed**: Commands work directly through the `orchestra` CLI
2. **Without Orchestra**: The bootstrap script shows one-time installation instructions

The bootstrap approach means:
- No duplicate code in version control
- Always uses the latest Orchestra version
- Graceful degradation for team members
- Commands in `.claude/commands/` are automatically available

## How It Works

Orchestra uses a bootstrap architecture:
- Commands: `.claude/commands/task/*.md` (slash commands)
- Bootstrap: `.claude/orchestra/bootstrap.py` (checks for Orchestra)
- Settings: Updates `.claude/settings.json` for hooks

The bootstrap script:
1. Checks if `orchestra` is in PATH
2. If yes: Executes the command
3. If no: Shows installation instructions (once per session)

## Project Structure

```
orchestra/
├── orchestra.py           # Main CLI
├── extensions/
│   └── task-monitor/
│       └── task_monitor.py
└── README.md
```

## Future Extensions

Ideas for future Orchestra extensions:
- `test-runner` - Run tests automatically on file changes
- `doc-writer` - Generate documentation as you code
- `pr-ready` - Ensure code is PR-ready with checks
- `time-tracker` - Track time spent on tasks

## Development & Testing

### Run Tests

```bash
# Activate virtual environment if not already active
source venv/bin/activate

# Run all tests
pytest

# Run tests with coverage
pytest --cov=src --cov-report=term-missing

# Run specific test types
pytest -m unit          # Unit tests only
pytest -m integration   # Integration tests only
pytest -m deviation_detection  # Deviation detection tests

# Run tests verbosely
pytest -v
```

### Code Quality

```bash
# Format code
black .

# Lint code
ruff check .

# Type checking
mypy src/

# Run all quality checks
black . && ruff check . && mypy src/
```

### Manual Testing

```bash
# Test Orchestra CLI directly
orchestra --help
orchestra list
orchestra install task-monitor

# Test task monitor commands
orchestra task start
orchestra task status
orchestra task next
orchestra task complete
```

## Contributing

Have an idea for an extension? Extensions are just Python scripts that integrate with Claude Code's hooks and slash commands. See the task-monitor source for an example.

## License

MIT

Commit message:

default to user scope to deal with claude limitation
- claude does not support conflicting slash commands - therefore if an
  extension is installed in both the user and project scope it shows up
  twice and causes strange behavior. so we default to user scope and
warn against using it.

- insert header to autogenerated files to denote that we created them
  and to support clean uninstalls.

README.md, after:

# Orchestra 🎼

> Orchestrate your Claude Code workflow with focused extensions

## Quick Start

```bash
# Clone and install Orchestra system-wide
git clone git@github.com:coopermaruyama/orchestra.git
cd orchestra
pip install --user .

# Install task-monitor extension (globally by default)
orchestra install task-monitor

# Or install to current project only
orchestra install task-monitor --project

# Use it in Claude Code
/task start
```

> Note: Extensions include a bootstrap script that allows team members to use commands even without Orchestra installed. They'll get friendly installation instructions on first use.


## What is Orchestra?

Orchestra is a lightweight extension manager for Claude Code that helps you stay focused and productive. Extensions are installed to `~/.claude/commands/` (global by default) or `.claude/commands/` (project-specific with `--project` flag).

> **⚠️ Important**: Claude Code does not support conflicts between user and project level commands. We recommend using global installation (default) unless you specifically need project-specific commands.

## Available Extensions

### task-monitor
Keep Claude focused on your task requirements. No scope creep, no over-engineering.

**Commands:**
- `/task start` - Interactive task setup with intelligent questions
- `/task status` - Check your progress
- `/task next` - See what to work on next
- `/task complete` - Mark current item done
- `/focus` - Quick focus reminder

**Features:**
- Blocks off-topic commands
- Warns about scope creep
- Tracks progress automatically
- Guides you through requirements

## Installation

### Prerequisites
- Python 3.8+
- pip (for `--user` install) or pipx (recommended for isolated install)

### Install Orchestra

**Option 1: System-wide installation (Recommended for CLI usage)**

```bash
# Clone the repository
git clone https://github.com/your-org/orchestra.git
cd orchestra

# Install system-wide (makes 'orchestra' available in PATH)
pip install --user .

# Or install with pipx (manages virtual environment automatically)
pipx install .
```

**Option 2: Development installation**

```bash
# Clone the repository
git clone https://github.com/your-org/orchestra.git
cd orchestra

# Create virtual environment
python3 -m venv venv
source venv/bin/activate  # On Windows: venv\Scripts\activate

# Install in development mode
pip install -e .
```

**Verify Installation**

```bash
# Check that orchestra is available in PATH
which orchestra
orchestra --help
```

### Install Extensions

```bash
# Global install (all projects) - DEFAULT
orchestra install task-monitor

# Project-specific install (current project only)
orchestra install task-monitor --project

# List installed extensions
orchestra list

# Uninstall from global scope (default)
orchestra uninstall task-monitor

# Uninstall from project scope
orchestra uninstall task-monitor --project
```

## Direct Command Usage

You can run task commands directly from the command line without entering Claude Code:

```bash
# Start a new task interactively
./orchestra.py task start

# Check task status
./orchestra.py task status

# See what to work on next
./orchestra.py task next

# Mark current requirement as complete
./orchestra.py task complete

# Get a quick focus reminder
./orchestra.py task focus
```

## Team Collaboration

When you install Orchestra extensions in a project, team members can use the commands immediately:

1. **With Orchestra installed**: Commands work directly through the `orchestra` CLI
2. **Without Orchestra**: The bootstrap script shows one-time installation instructions

The bootstrap approach means:
- No duplicate code in version control
- Always uses the latest Orchestra version
- Graceful degradation for team members
- Commands in `.claude/commands/` are automatically available

## How It Works

Orchestra uses a bootstrap architecture:
- Commands: `.claude/commands/task/*.md` (slash commands)
- Bootstrap: `.claude/orchestra/bootstrap.py` (checks for Orchestra)
- Settings: Updates `.claude/settings.json` for hooks

The bootstrap script:
1. Checks if `orchestra` is in PATH
2. If yes: Executes the command
3. If no: Shows installation instructions (once per session)

## Project Structure

```
orchestra/
├── orchestra.py           # Main CLI
├── extensions/
│   └── task-monitor/
│       └── task_monitor.py
└── README.md
```

## Future Extensions

Ideas for future Orchestra extensions:
- `test-runner` - Run tests automatically on file changes
- `doc-writer` - Generate documentation as you code
- `pr-ready` - Ensure code is PR-ready with checks
- `time-tracker` - Track time spent on tasks

## Development & Testing

### Run Tests

```bash
# Activate virtual environment if not already active
source venv/bin/activate

# Run all tests
pytest

# Run tests with coverage
pytest --cov=src --cov-report=term-missing

# Run specific test types
pytest -m unit          # Unit tests only
pytest -m integration   # Integration tests only
pytest -m deviation_detection  # Deviation detection tests

# Run tests verbosely
pytest -v
```

### Code Quality

```bash
# Format code
black .

# Lint code
ruff check .

# Type checking
mypy src/

# Run all quality checks
black . && ruff check . && mypy src/
```

### Manual Testing

```bash
# Test Orchestra CLI directly
orchestra --help
orchestra list
orchestra install task-monitor

# Test task monitor commands
orchestra task start
orchestra task status
orchestra task next
orchestra task complete
```

## Contributing

Have an idea for an extension? Extensions are just Python scripts that integrate with Claude Code's hooks and slash commands. See the task-monitor source for an example.

## License

MIT
